## Overall objective
The overall objective of the Molecular Phase of the STG Module is to equip students with comprehensive understanding of the relationships between molecular activity in the nervous system and complex behavior. A series of lectures will introduce students to the history and theory of “neuro-molecular-ethology” as well as current research focused on behaviorally relevant patterns of gene expression in the nervous system. We will teach molecular techniques to complement the electrophysiological characterization of identified cells in stomatogastric ganglion. Knowledge and technical skills gained in this module will be widely applicable to research in other model and non-model organisms allowing students to ask questions on multiple levels of biological organization.

We will build on the skills and understanding of the stomatogastric system generated in Cycle II, emphasizing the link between gene expression, neural activity, and behavior.  The module is focused on two key integrated technical approaches – high throughput sequence analysis and qPCR – with the emphasis on single-cell level analyses for both of these approaches.  Students will learn the technical and conceptual advances in modern genomic approaches and apply them to both transcriptome-wide and candidate gene analyses aimed at interrogating the molecular basis of neural network output.

## Module Overview
In the first week, students will be introduced to fundamental molecular techniques such as RNA extraction, reverse transcription, RT-PCR, and qPCR design and analysis.  Concomitant with this wet-lab training is an in-depth introduction into the concepts and practical approaches centered around bioinformatics workflow for RNAseq data. The goal is for students to feel confident generating and utilizing raw RNAseq data and establishing a pipeline for assembly and analysis for use in downstream applications. From these bioinformatics data, students will “mine” the sequence data for candidate gene targets that are experimentally relevant to the system at hand. After characterizing the sequence of novel genes of interest, students will design, validate and employ de novo qPCR assays to address specific questions relevant to stomatogastric physiology. The second week of the STG-Integrative Cycle is dedicated to independent projects that integrate the entirety of this new skill set, and address specific principles of activity-dependent gene expression and transcriptome-level neuronal functional identity common across nervous systems. Because the STG is a relatively new system with respect to molecular genetic approaches, these projects are expected to gather new unpublished data and advance the understanding of molecular underpinnings of neural network function both specifically for the STG and generally across systems.udents to learn strategies to bridge our separate understandings of memory by exploring how traces of a spatial memory are encoded in gene expression changes of neurons across the hippocampus network. 